test/kubernetes/deploy/README.md, before:

# Deploying and Testing a Development Version

The most convenient way to test changes to csi-digitalocean is on a
[DigitalOcean Kubernetes (DOKS)](https://www.digitalocean.com/products/kubernetes/)
cluster. However, since DOKS clusters run the DigitalOcean CSI controller as a
managed component that cannot be modified by the user, deploying with the
example manifests will not work.

To test a development version on a DOKS cluster, do the following:

1. Create a DOKS cluster on the latest version:

   ```shell
   $ doctl k8s cluster create csi-integration-test
   Notice: cluster is provisioning, waiting for cluster to be running
   ..
   ```

   Wait for it to finish creating; your kubeconfig will automatically be updated.

2. Build and push a dev version of csi-digitalocean by running `VERSION=dev make publish`
   from the root of the repository.

3. Run `deploy.sh` from this directory, providing a DO API access token for your
   account (This requires [`kustomize`](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kustomize) and `kubectl`):

   ```shell
   $ DIGITALOCEAN_ACCESS_TOKEN=<token> ./deploy.sh
   Deploying a dev version of the CSI driver to context do-nyc1-csi-integration-test.
   Continue? (yes/no)
   yes
   ```

   (You can also pass `-y` or `--yes` as a parameter to `deploy.sh` to skip the prompt.)

4. Run the integration tests from the repository root specifying a DigitalOcean API token
   against the dev storage class:

   ```shell
   CSI_DIGITALOCEAN_ACCESS_TOKEN=aa823a5a07d5aa7c TEST_STORAGE_CLASS=do-block-storage-dev make test-integration
   ```

   **Note:** If the `CSI_DIGITALOCEAN_ACCESS_TOKEN` environment variable does not specify
   a token, the standard `DIGITALOCEAN_ACCESS_TOKEN` environment variable will be tried before
   returning an error.

## Alternative Image Locations

The instructions above assume you have push access to the
`digitalocean/do-csi-plugin` repository on Docker Hub. However, this is not
necessary to build and test a dev version of the CSI driver.

To build and publish a test version in your own image repository, do the
following from the root of the repository:

```shell
DOCKER_REPO=<my-image-repository> VERSION=dev make publish
```

You can then follow the instructions above, setting the `DEV_IMAGE` environment
variable to your own image location when invoking `deploy.sh`.

Commit message:

Support v1beta1 snapshots (#322)
This change adds support for v1beta1 snapshots. The change is breaking,
meaning that v1alpha1 snapshots cannot be used anymore. Consequently, we
also stop testing for Kubernetes releases below 1.17 which do did not
support v1beta1 snapshots.

Changes in detail:

- Update manifests, including the addition of the new snapshot
  controller and update of the csi-snapshotter and csi-provisioner
  sidecars.
- Split up release manifests into multiple files to limit kustomize
  usage to manifests that require modification for testing. In
  particular, the snapshot controller is excluded which does not support
  running in a dev and non-dev version concurrently.
- Update examples.
- Update CI and build references to Kubernetes releases.
- Remove VolumeSnapshotDataSource feature gate which is enabled by
  default since 1.17.
- Remove integration tests that were needed for Kubernetes <1.14 only.
- Extend documentation.

test/kubernetes/deploy/README.md, after:

# Deploying a Development Version Manually

For most tasks, the [e2e test shell wrapper](/test/e2e) should be used to run tests. It leverages the deploy script described below which can also be invoked manually.

The best way to test changes to csi-digitalocean is on a
[DigitalOcean Kubernetes (DOKS)](https://www.digitalocean.com/products/kubernetes/)
cluster. However, since DOKS clusters run the DigitalOcean CSI controller as a
managed component that cannot be modified by the user, deploying with the
example manifests will not work.

To test a development version on a DOKS cluster, do the following:

1. Create a DOKS cluster on the latest version:

   ```shell
   $ doctl k8s cluster create csi-integration-test
   Notice: cluster is provisioning, waiting for cluster to be running
   ..
   ```

   Wait for it to finish creating; your kubeconfig will automatically be updated.

2. Build and push a dev version of csi-digitalocean by running `VERSION=dev make publish`
   from the root of the repository.

3. Run `deploy.sh` from this directory, providing a DO API access token for your
   account (This requires [`kustomize`](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kustomize) and `kubectl`):

   ```shell
   $ DIGITALOCEAN_ACCESS_TOKEN=<token> ./deploy.sh
   Deploying a dev version of the CSI driver to context do-nyc1-csi-integration-test.
   Continue? (yes/no)
   yes
   ```

   (You can also pass `-y` or `--yes` as a parameter to `deploy.sh` to skip the prompt.)

## Alternative Image Locations

The instructions above assume you have push access to the
`digitalocean/do-csi-plugin` repository on Docker Hub. However, this is not
necessary to build and test a dev version of the CSI driver.

To build and publish a test version in your own image repository, do the
following from the root of the repository:

```shell
DOCKER_REPO=<my-image-repository> VERSION=dev make publish
```

You can then follow the instructions above, setting the `DEV_IMAGE` environment
variable to your own image location when invoking `deploy.sh`.
